

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap01" id="chap01"></a>I</h2>

<p>
Strings in the earth and air<br />
    Make music sweet;<br />
Strings by the river where<br />
    The willows meet.<br /><br />

There’s music along the river<br />
    For Love wanders there,<br />
Pale flowers on his mantle,<br />
    Dark leaves on his hair.<br /><br />

All softly playing,<br />
    With head to the music bent,<br />
And fingers straying<br />
    Upon an instrument.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap02" id="chap02"></a>II</h2>

<p>
The twilight turns from amethyst<br />
    To deep and deeper blue,<br />
The lamp fills with a pale green glow<br />
    The trees of the avenue.<br /><br />

The old piano plays an air,<br />
    Sedate and slow and gay;<br />
She bends upon the yellow keys,<br />
    Her head inclines this way.<br /><br />

Shy thought and grave wide eyes and hands<br />
    That wander as they list—<br />
The twilight turns to darker blue<br />
    With lights of amethyst.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap03" id="chap03"></a>III</h2>

<p>
At that hour when all things have repose,<br />
    O lonely watcher of the skies,<br />
    Do you hear the night wind and the sighs<br />
Of harps playing unto Love to unclose<br />
    The pale gates of sunrise?<br /><br />

When all things repose, do you alone<br />
    Awake to hear the sweet harps play<br />
    To Love before him on his way,<br />
And the night wind answering in antiphon<br />
    Till night is overgone?<br /><br />

Play on, invisible harps, unto Love,<br />
    Whose way in heaven is aglow<br />
    At that hour when soft lights come and go,<br />
Soft sweet music in the air above<br />
    And in the earth below.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap04" id="chap04"></a>IV</h2>

<p>
When the shy star goes forth in heaven<br />
    All maidenly, disconsolate,<br />
Hear you amid the drowsy even<br />
    One who is singing by your gate.<br />
His song is softer than the dew<br />
    And he is come to visit you.<br /><br />

O bend no more in revery<br />
    When he at eventide is calling,<br />
Nor muse: Who may this singer be<br />
    Whose song about my heart is falling?<br />
Know you by this, the lover’s chant,<br />
    ’Tis I that am your visitant.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap05" id="chap05"></a>V</h2>

<p>
Lean out of the window,<br />
    Goldenhair,<br />
I hear you singing<br />
    A merry air.<br /><br />

My book was closed,<br />
    I read no more,<br />
Watching the fire dance<br />
    On the floor.<br /><br />

I have left my book,<br />
    I have left my room,<br />
For I heard you singing<br />
    Through the gloom.<br /><br />

Singing and singing<br />
    A merry air,<br />
Lean out of the window,<br />
    Goldenhair.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap06" id="chap06"></a>VI</h2>

<p>
I would in that sweet bosom be<br />
    (O sweet it is and fair it is!)<br />
Where no rude wind might visit me.<br />
    Because of sad austerities<br />
I would in that sweet bosom be.<br /><br />

I would be ever in that heart<br />
    (O soft I knock and soft entreat her!)<br />
Where only peace might be my part.<br />
    Austerities were all the sweeter<br />
So I were ever in that heart.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap07" id="chap07"></a>VII</h2>

<p>
My love is in a light attire<br />
    Among the apple-trees,<br />
Where the gay winds do most desire<br />
    To run in companies.<br /><br />

There, where the gay winds stay to woo<br />
    The young leaves as they pass,<br />
My love goes slowly, bending to<br />
    Her shadow on the grass;<br /><br />

And where the sky’s a pale blue cup<br />
    Over the laughing land,<br />
My love goes lightly, holding up<br />
    Her dress with dainty hand.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap08" id="chap08"></a>VIII</h2>

<p>
Who goes amid the green wood<br />
    With springtide all adorning her?<br />
Who goes amid the merry green wood<br />
    To make it merrier?<br /><br />

Who passes in the sunlight<br />
    By ways that know the light footfall?<br />
Who passes in the sweet sunlight<br />
    With mien so virginal?<br /><br />

The ways of all the woodland<br />
    Gleam with a soft and golden fire—<br />
For whom does all the sunny woodland<br />
    Carry so brave attire?<br /><br />

O, it is for my true love<br />
    The woods their rich apparel wear—<br />
O, it is for my own true love,<br />
    That is so young and fair.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap09" id="chap09"></a>IX</h2>

<p>
Winds of May, that dance on the sea,<br />
Dancing a ring-around in glee<br />
From furrow to furrow, while overhead<br />
The foam flies up to be garlanded,<br />
In silvery arches spanning the air,<br />
Saw you my true love anywhere?<br />
    Welladay! Welladay!<br />
    For the winds of May!<br />
Love is unhappy when love is away!
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap10" id="chap10"></a>X</h2>

<p>
Bright cap and streamers,<br />
    He sings in the hollow:<br />
    Come follow, come follow,<br />
        All you that love.<br />
Leave dreams to the dreamers<br />
    That will not after,<br />
    That song and laughter<br />
        Do nothing move.<br /><br />

With ribbons streaming<br />
    He sings the bolder;<br />
    In troop at his shoulder<br />
        The wild bees hum.<br />
And the time of dreaming<br />
    Dreams is over—<br />
    As lover to lover,<br />
        Sweetheart, I come.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap11" id="chap11"></a>XI</h2>

<p>
Bid adieu, adieu, adieu,<br />
    Bid adieu to girlish days,<br />
Happy Love is come to woo<br />
    Thee and woo thy girlish ways—<br />
The zone that doth become thee fair,<br />
The snood upon thy yellow hair,<br /><br />

When thou hast heard his name upon<br />
    The bugles of the cherubim<br />
Begin thou softly to unzone<br />
    Thy girlish bosom unto him<br />
And softly to undo the snood<br />
That is the sign of maidenhood.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap12" id="chap12"></a>XII</h2>

<p>
What counsel has the hooded moon<br />
    Put in thy heart, my shyly sweet,<br />
Of Love in ancient plenilune,<br />
    Glory and stars beneath his feet—<br />
A sage that is but kith and kin<br />
With the comedian Capuchin?<br /><br />

Believe me rather that am wise<br />
    In disregard of the divine,<br />
A glory kindles in those eyes<br />
    Trembles to starlight. Mine, O Mine!<br />
No more be tears in moon or mist<br />
For thee, sweet sentimentalist.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap13" id="chap13"></a>XIII</h2>

<p>
Go seek her out all courteously,<br />
    And say I come,<br />
Wind of spices whose song is ever<br />
    Epithalamium.<br />
O, hurry over the dark lands<br />
    And run upon the sea<br />
For seas and lands shall not divide us,<br />
    My love and me.<br /><br />

Now, wind, of your good courtesy<br />
    I pray you go,<br />
And come into her little garden<br />
    And sing at her window;<br />
Singing: The bridal wind is blowing<br />
    For Love is at his noon;<br />
And soon will your true love be with you,<br />
    Soon, O soon.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap14" id="chap14"></a>XIV</h2>

<p>
My dove, my beautiful one,<br />
    Arise, arise!<br />
    The night-dew lies<br />
Upon my lips and eyes.<br /><br />

The odorous winds are weaving<br />
    A music of sighs:<br />
    Arise, arise,<br />
My dove, my beautiful one!<br /><br />

I wait by the cedar tree,<br />
    My sister, my love,<br />
    White breast of the dove,<br />
My breast shall be your bed.<br /><br />

The pale dew lies<br />
    Like a veil on my head.<br />
    My fair one, my fair dove,<br />
Arise, arise!
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap15" id="chap15"></a>XV</h2>

<p>
From dewy dreams, my soul, arise,<br />
    From love’s deep slumber and from death,<br />
For lo! the trees are full of sighs<br />
    Whose leaves the morn admonisheth.<br /><br />

Eastward the gradual dawn prevails<br />
    Where softly-burning fires appear,<br />
Making to tremble all those veils<br />
    Of grey and golden gossamer.<br /><br />

While sweetly, gently, secretly,<br />
    The flowery bells of morn are stirred<br />
And the wise choirs of faery<br />
    Begin (innumerous!) to be heard.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap16" id="chap16"></a>XVI</h2>

<p>
O cool is the valley now<br />
    And there, love, will we go<br />
For many a choir is singing now<br />
    Where Love did sometime go.<br />
And hear you not the thrushes calling,<br />
    Calling us away?<br />
O cool and pleasant is the valley<br />
    And there, love, will we stay.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap17" id="chap17"></a>XVII</h2>

<p>
Because your voice was at my side<br />
    I gave him pain,<br />
Because within my hand I held<br />
    Your hand again.<br /><br />

There is no word nor any sign<br />
    Can make amend—<br />
He is a stranger to me now<br />
    Who was my friend.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap18" id="chap18"></a>XVIII</h2>

<p>
O sweetheart, hear you<br />
    Your lover’s tale;<br />
A man shall have sorrow<br />
    When friends him fail.<br /><br />

For he shall know then<br />
    Friends be untrue<br />
And a little ashes<br />
    Their words come to.<br /><br />

But one unto him<br />
    Will softly move<br />
And softly woo him<br />
    In ways of love.<br /><br />

His hand is under<br />
    Her smooth round breast;<br />
So he who has sorrow<br />
    Shall have rest.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap19" id="chap19"></a>XIX</h2>

<p>
Be not sad because all men<br />
    Prefer a lying clamour before you:<br />
Sweetheart, be at peace again—<br />
    Can they dishonour you?<br /><br />

They are sadder than all tears;<br />
    Their lives ascend as a continual sigh.<br />
Proudly answer to their tears:<br />
    As they deny, deny.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap20" id="chap20"></a>XX</h2>

<p>
In the dark pine-wood<br />
    I would we lay,<br />
In deep cool shadow<br />
    At noon of day.<br /><br />

How sweet to lie there,<br />
    Sweet to kiss,<br />
Where the great pine-forest<br />
    Enaisled is!<br /><br />

Thy kiss descending<br />
    Sweeter were<br />
With a soft tumult<br />
    Of thy hair.<br /><br />

O, unto the pine-wood<br />
    At noon of day<br />
Come with me now,<br />
    Sweet love, away.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap21" id="chap21"></a>XXI</h2>

<p>
He who hath glory lost, nor hath<br />
    Found any soul to fellow his,<br />
Among his foes in scorn and wrath<br />
    Holding to ancient nobleness,<br />
That high unconsortable one—<br />
His love is his companion.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap22" id="chap22"></a>XXII</h2>

<p>
Of that so sweet imprisonment<br />
    My soul, dearest, is fain—<br />
Soft arms that woo me to relent<br />
    And woo me to detain.<br />
Ah, could they ever hold me there<br />
Gladly were I a prisoner!<br /><br />

Dearest, through interwoven arms<br />
    By love made tremulous,<br />
That night allures me where alarms<br />
    Nowise may trouble us;<br />
But sleep to dreamier sleep be wed<br />
Where soul with soul lies prisoned.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap23" id="chap23"></a>XXIII</h2>

<p>
This heart that flutters near my heart<br />
    My hope and all my riches is,<br />
Unhappy when we draw apart<br />
    And happy between kiss and kiss;<br />
My hope and all my riches—yes!—<br />
And all my happiness.<br /><br />

For there, as in some mossy nest<br />
    The wrens will divers treasures keep,<br />
I laid those treasures I possessed<br />
    Ere that mine eyes had learned to weep.<br />
Shall we not be as wise as they<br />
Though love live but a day?
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap24" id="chap24"></a>XXIV</h2>

<p>
Silently she’s combing,<br />
    Combing her long hair,<br />
Silently and graciously,<br />
    With many a pretty air.<br /><br />

The sun is in the willow leaves<br />
    And on the dappled grass,<br />
And still she’s combing her long hair<br />
    Before the looking-glass.<br /><br />

I pray you, cease to comb out,<br />
    Comb out your long hair,<br />
For I have heard of witchery<br />
    Under a pretty air,<br /><br />

That makes as one thing to the lover<br />
    Staying and going hence,<br />
All fair, with many a pretty air<br />
    And many a negligence.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap25" id="chap25"></a>XXV</h2>

<p>
Lightly come or lightly go:<br />
    Though thy heart presage thee woe,<br />
Vales and many a wasted sun,<br />
    Oread let thy laughter run<br />
Till the irreverent mountain air<br />
Ripple all thy flying hair.<br /><br />

Lightly, lightly—ever so:<br />
    Clouds that wrap the vales below<br />
At the hour of evenstar<br />
    Lowliest attendants are;<br />
Love and laughter song-confessed<br />
When the heart is heaviest.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap26" id="chap26"></a>XXVI</h2>

<p>
Thou leanest to the shell of night,<br />
    Dear lady, a divining ear.<br />
In that soft choiring of delight<br />
    What sound hath made thy heart to fear?<br />
Seemed it of rivers rushing forth<br />
From the grey deserts of the north?<br /><br />

    That mood of thine, O timorous,<br />
Is his, if thou but scan it well,<br />
    Who a mad tale bequeaths to us<br />
At ghosting hour conjurable—<br />
    And all for some strange name he read<br />
    In Purchas or in Holinshed.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap27" id="chap27"></a>XXVII</h2>

<p>
Though I thy Mithridates were,<br />
    Framed to defy the poison-dart,<br />
Yet must thou fold me unaware<br />
    To know the rapture of thy heart,<br />
And I but render and confess<br />
The malice of thy tenderness.<br /><br />

For elegant and antique phrase,<br />
    Dearest, my lips wax all too wise;<br />
Nor have I known a love whose praise<br />
    Our piping poets solemnize,<br />
Neither a love where may not be<br />
Ever so little falsity.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap28" id="chap28"></a>XXVIII</h2>

<p>
Gentle lady, do not sing<br />
    Sad songs about the end of love;<br />
Lay aside sadness and sing<br />
    How love that passes is enough.<br /><br />

Sing about the long deep sleep<br />
    Of lovers that are dead, and how<br />
In the grave all love shall sleep:<br />
    Love is aweary now.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap29" id="chap29"></a>XXIX</h2>

<p>
Dear heart, why will you use me so?<br />
    Dear eyes that gently me upbraid,<br />
Still are you beautiful—but O,<br />
    How is your beauty raimented!<br /><br />

Through the clear mirror of your eyes,<br />
    Through the soft sigh of kiss to kiss,<br />
Desolate winds assail with cries<br />
    The shadowy garden where love is.<br /><br />

And soon shall love dissolved be<br />
    When over us the wild winds blow—<br />
But you, dear love, too dear to me,<br />
    Alas! why will you use me so?
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap30" id="chap30"></a>XXX</h2>

<p>
Love came to us in time gone by<br />
    When one at twilight shyly played<br />
And one in fear was standing nigh—<br />
    For Love at first is all afraid.<br /><br />

We were grave lovers. Love is past<br />
    That had his sweet hours many a one;<br />
Welcome to us now at the last<br />
    The ways that we shall go upon.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap31" id="chap31"></a>XXXI</h2>

<p>
O, it was out by Donnycarney<br />
    When the bat flew from tree to tree<br />
My love and I did walk together;<br />
    And sweet were the words she said to me.<br /><br />

Along with us the summer wind<br />
    Went murmuring—O, happily!—<br />
But softer than the breath of summer<br />
    Was the kiss she gave to me.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap32" id="chap32"></a>XXXII</h2>

<p>
Rain has fallen all the day.<br />
    O come among the laden trees:<br />
The leaves lie thick upon the way<br />
    Of memories.<br /><br />

Staying a little by the way<br />
    Of memories shall we depart.<br />
Come, my beloved, where I may<br />
    Speak to your heart.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap33" id="chap33"></a>XXXIII</h2>

<p>
Now, O now, in this brown land<br />
    Where Love did so sweet music make<br />
We two shall wander, hand in hand,<br />
    Forbearing for old friendship’ sake,<br />
Nor grieve because our love was gay<br />
Which now is ended in this way.<br /><br />

A rogue in red and yellow dress<br />
    Is knocking, knocking at the tree;<br />
And all around our loneliness<br />
    The wind is whistling merrily.<br />
The leaves—they do not sigh at all<br />
When the year takes them in the fall.<br /><br />

Now, O now, we hear no more<br />
    The vilanelle and roundelay!<br />
Yet will we kiss, sweetheart, before<br />
    We take sad leave at close of day.<br />
Grieve not, sweetheart, for anything—<br />
The year, the year is gathering.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap34" id="chap34"></a>XXXIV</h2>

<p>
Sleep now, O sleep now,<br />
    O you unquiet heart!<br />
A voice crying “Sleep now”<br />
    Is heard in my heart.<br /><br />

The voice of the winter<br />
    Is heard at the door.<br />
O sleep, for the winter<br />
    Is crying “Sleep no more.”<br /><br />

My kiss will give peace now<br />
    And quiet to your heart—<br />
Sleep on in peace now,<br />
    O you unquiet heart!
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap35" id="chap35"></a>XXXV</h2>

<p>
All day I hear the noise of waters<br />
    Making moan,<br />
Sad as the sea-bird is, when going<br />
    Forth alone,<br />
He hears the winds cry to the water’s<br />
    Monotone.<br /><br />

The grey winds, the cold winds are blowing<br />
    Where I go.<br />
I hear the noise of many waters<br />
    Far below.<br />
All day, all night, I hear them flowing<br />
    To and fro.
</p>

</div><!--end chapter-->

<div class="chapter">

<h2><a name="chap36" id="chap36"></a>XXXVI</h2>

<p>
I hear an army charging upon the land,<br />
And the thunder of horses plunging, foam about their knees:<br />
Arrogant, in black armour, behind them stand,<br />
Disdaining the reins, with fluttering whips, the charioteers.<br /><br />

They cry unto the night their battle-name:<br />
I moan in sleep when I hear afar their whirling laughter.<br />
They cleave the gloom of dreams, a blinding flame,<br />
Clanging, clanging upon the heart as upon an anvil.<br /><br />

They come shaking in triumph their long, green hair:<br />
They come out of the sea and run shouting by the shore.<br />
My heart, have you no wisdom thus to despair?<br />
My love, my love, my love, why have you left me alone?
</p>

</div>
