<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Gas from a Burner</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter">
		<article id="gas-from-a-burner" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Gas from a Burner</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Ladies and gents, you are here assembled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear why earth and heaven trembled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because of the black and sinister arts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an Irish writer in foreign parts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sent me a book ten years ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I read it a hundred times or so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backwards and forwards, down and up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through both the ends of a telescope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I printed it all to the very last word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But by the mercy of the Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness of my mind was rent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I saw the writer’s foul intent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I owe a duty to Ireland:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I held her honour in my hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This lovely land that always sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her writers and artists to banishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a spirit of Irish fun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betrayed her own leaders, one by one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas Irish humour, wet and dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flung quicklime into Parnell’s eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis Irish brains that save from doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leaky barge of the Bishop of Rome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For everyone knows the Pope can’t belch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the consent of Billy Walsh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Ireland my first and only love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Christ and Caesar are hand and glove!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O lovely land where the shamrock grows!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Allow me, ladies, to blow my nose)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show you for strictures I don’t care a button</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I printed the poems of Mountainy Mutton</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a play he wrote (you’ve read it I’m sure)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they talk of bastard, bugger and whore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a play on the Word and Holy Paul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some woman’s legs that I can’t recall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Written by Moore, a genuine gent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lives on his property’s ten per cent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I printed mystical books in dozens:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I printed the table-book of Cousins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though (asking your pardon) as for the verse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twould give you a heartburn on your arse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I printed folklore from North and South</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Gregory of the Golden Mouth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I printed poets, sad, silly and solemn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I printed Patrick What-do-you-Colm:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I printed the great John Milicent Synge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who soars above on an angel’s wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the playboy shift that he pinched as swag</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Maunsel’s manager’s travelling-bag.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I draw the line at that bloody fellow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was over here dressed in Austrian yellow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spouting Italian by the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To O’Leary Curtis and John Wyse Power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And writing of Dublin, dirty and dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a manner no blackamoor printer could bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shite and onions! Do you think I’ll print</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The name of the Wellington Monument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sydney Parade and Sandymount tram,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Downes’s cakeshop and Williams’s jam?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m damned if I do⁠—I’m damned to blazes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talk about Irish Names of Places!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s a wonder to me, upon my soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He forgot to mention Curly’s Hole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, ladies, my press shall have no share in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So gross a libel on Stepmother Erin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pity the poor⁠—that’s why I took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A red-headed Scotchman to keep my book.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor sister Scotland! Her doom is fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cannot find any more Stuarts to sell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My conscience is fine as Chinese silk:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart is as soft as buttermilk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Colm can tell you I made a rebate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one hundred pounds on the estimate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I gave him for his Irish Review.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love my country⁠—by herrings I do!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wish you could see what tears I weep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I think of the emigrant train and ship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s why I publish far and wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My quite illegible railway guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the porch of my printing institute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poor and deserving prostitute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plays every night at catch-as-catch-can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her tight-breeched British artilleryman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the foreigner learns the gift of the gab</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the drunken draggletail Dublin drab.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who was it said: Resist not evil?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll burn that book, so help me devil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll sing a psalm as I watch it burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the ashes I’ll keep in a one-handled urn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll penance do with farts and groans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kneeling upon my marrowbones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This very next lent I will unbare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My penitent buttocks to the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sobbing beside my printing press</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My awful sin I will confess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Irish foreman from Bannockburn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall dip his right hand in the urn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sign crisscross with reverent thumb</span>
				<br/>
				<span><i xml:lang="la">Memento homo</i> upon my bum.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
