<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Pomes Penyeach</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter">
		<section id="pomes-penyeach" epub:type="volume">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Pomes Penyeach</h2>
			<article id="tilly" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Tilly</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He travels after a winter sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Urging the cattle along a cold red road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calling to them, a voice they know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drives his beasts above Cabra.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The voice tells them home is warm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They moo and make brute music with their hoofs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drives them with a flowering branch before him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smoke pluming their foreheads.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Boor, bond of the herd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tonight stretch full by the fire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bleed by the black stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my torn bough!</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Dublin, 1904</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="watching-the-needleboats-at-san-sabba" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Watching the Needleboats at San Sabba</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I heard their young hearts crying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loveward above the glancing oar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard the prairie grasses sighing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more, return no more!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O hearts, O sighing grasses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vainly your loveblown bannerets mourn!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more will the wild wind that passes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return, no more return.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Trieste, 1912</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="a-flower-given-to-my-daughter" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Flower Given to My Daughter</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Frail the white rose and frail are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hands that gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose soul is sere and paler</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than time’s wan wave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Rosefrail and fair⁠—yet frailest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wonder wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In gentle eyes thou veilest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My blueveined child.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Trieste, 1913</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="she-weeps-over-rahoon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">She Weeps Over Rahoon</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Rain on Rahoon falls softly, softly falling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where my dark lover lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad is his voice that calls me, sadly calling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At grey moonrise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Love, hear thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How soft, how sad his voice is ever calling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever unanswered, and the dark rain falling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then as now.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dark too our hearts, O love, shall lie and cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As his sad heart has lain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the moongrey nettles, the black mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And muttering rain.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Trieste, 1913</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="tutto-e-sciolto" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title" xml:lang="it">Tutto è Sciolto</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A birdless heaven, seadusk, one lone star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Piercing the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou, fond heart, love’s time, so faint, so far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rememberest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The clear young eyes’ soft look, the candid brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fragrant hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Falling as through the silence falleth now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dusk of the air.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Why then, remembering those shy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet lures, repine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the dear love she yielded with a sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was all but thine?</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Trieste, 1914</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="on-the-beach-at-fontana" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On the Beach at Fontana</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Wind whines and whines the shingle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crazy pierstakes groan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A senile sea numbers each single</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slimesilvered stone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From whining wind and colder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grey sea I wrap him warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And touch his trembling fineboned shoulder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And boyish arm.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Around us fear, descending</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darkness of fear above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my heart how deep unending</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ache of love!</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Trieste, 1914</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="simples" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Simples</h3>
					<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse" xml:lang="it">
						<p>
							<span>O bella bionda,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sei come l’onda!</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of cool sweet dew and radiance mild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon a web of silence weaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the still garden where a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gathers the simple salad leaves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A moondew stars her hanging hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And moonlight kisses her young brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, gathering, she sings an air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair as the wave is, fair, art thou!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Be mine, I pray, a waxen ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shield me from her childish croon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mine a shielded heart for her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who gathers simples of the moon.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Trieste, 1915</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="flood" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Flood</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Goldbrown upon the sated flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rockvine clusters lift and sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vast wings above the lambent waters brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sullen day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A waste of waters ruthlessly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sways and uplifts its weedy mane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where brooding day stares down upon the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dull disdain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Uplift and sway, O golden vine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your clustered fruits to love’s full flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lambent and vast and ruthless as in thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incertitude!</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Trieste, 1915</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="nightpiece" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Nightpiece</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Gaunt in gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pale stars their torches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enshrouded, wave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ghostfires from heaven’s far verges faint illume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arches on soaring arches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night’s sindark nave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Seraphim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lost hosts awaken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To service till</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In moonless gloom each lapses muted, dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raised when she has and shaken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her thurible.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And long and loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To night’s nave upsoaring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A starknell tolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the bleak insense surges, cloud on cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voidward from the adoring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waste of souls.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Trieste, 1915</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="alone" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title" xml:lang="it">Alone</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The moon’s greygolden meshes make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night a veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shorelamps in the sleeping lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laburnum tendrils trail.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sly reeds whisper to the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A name⁠—her name⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my soul is a delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A swoon of shame.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Zurich, 1916</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="a-memoty-of-the-players-in-a-mirror-at-midnight" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Memory of the Players in a Mirror at Midnight</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They mouth love’s language. Gnash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thirteen teeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your lean jaws grin with. Lash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your itch and quailing, nude greed of the flesh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s breath in you is stale, worded or sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sour as cat’s breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harsh of tongue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This grey that stares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies not, stark skin and bone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave greasy lips their kissing. None</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will choose her what you see to mouth upon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dire hunger holds his hour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pluck forth your heart, saltblood, a fruit of tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pluck and devour!</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Zurich, 1917</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="bahnhofstrasse" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title" xml:lang="de">Bahnhofstrasse</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The eyes that mock me sign the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereto I pass at eve of day,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Grey way whose violet signals are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trysting and the twining star.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah star of evil! star of pain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Highhearted youth comes not again</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor old heart’s wisdom yet to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The signs that mock me as I go.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Zurich, 1918</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="a-prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Prayer</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Come, give, yield all your strength to me!</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From far a low word breathes on the breaking brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its cruel calm, submission’s misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gentling her awe as to a soul predestined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cease, silent love! My doom!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Blind me with your dark nearness, O have mercy, beloved enemy of my will!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I dare not withstand the cold touch that I dread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draw from me still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My slow life! Bend deeper on me, threatening head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proud by my downfall, remembering, pitying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him who is, him who was!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together, folded by the night, they lay on earth. I hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From far her low word breathe on my breaking brain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Come!</em> I yield. Bend deeper upon me! I am here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subduer, do not leave me! Only joy, only anguish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take me, save me, soothe me, O spare me!</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Paris, 1924</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
